The Osborne 1 was the first commercially successful portable microcomputer, released on April3, 1981, by Osborne Computer Corporation. It weighed 10.7 kg (24.5 lb), cost US$1,795, and ran the CP/M 2.2 operating system. Powered directly from a mains socket as it had no on-board battery, it was still classed as a portable device since it could be hand carried when packed. 
 
The Osborne 1 was developed by Adam Osborne and designed by Lee Felsenstein. It was first announced in early 1981. Osborne, an author of computer books, decided he wanted to break the price of computers. 
 
The Osborne's design was based largely on the Xerox NoteTaker, a prototype developed at Xerox PARC in 1976 by Alan Kay. The computer was designed to be portable, with a rugged ABS plastic case that closed up, and a handle. The Osborne 1 was about the size and weight of a sewing machine and was advertised as the only computer that would fit underneath an airline seat. It is now classified as a 'luggable' computer when compared to later laptop designs such as the Epson HX-20. Despite its unattractive design and heavy weight the computer amazed observers. BYTE wrote,' it will cost $1795, and it's portable!' ($1795 is the equivalent of $4832 today.) The bundled word processing, spreadsheet, and other software alone was worth $1,500; as InfoWorld stated in an April 1981 front-page article on the new computer after listing the included software, 'In case you think the price printed above was a mistake, we'll repeat it: $1795.' 
 
Osborne claimed that the new computer had a 'significant price/performance advantage' but emphasized the price, stating that its performance was 'merely adequate': 'It is not the fastest microcomputer, it doesn't have huge amounts of disk storage space, and it not especially expandable.' Beyond the price, advertisements emphasized the computer's portability and bundled software. In the first eight months after April 1981, when the Osborne 1 was announced, the company sold 11,000 units. Sales at their peak reached 10,000 units per month. 
 
Its principal deficiencies were a tiny 5-inch (13 cm) display screen and use of single sided, single density floppy disk drives which could not contain sufficient data for practical business applications, and considerable unit weight. A single-density disk controller was used to keep costs down. As a result, the Osborne's floppy disks held a mere 90k. Later Osborne models switched to double-density controllers and an upgrade was offered to owners of the original model Osborne 1. In September 1981, Osborne Computer Company had its first US$1 million sales month. Sales of the Osborne 1 were hurt by the company's premature announcement of superior successor machines such as the Osborne Executive, a phenomenon later called the Osborne effect.
